[SYCL] Add spec for sycl_ext_intel_cslice (#7513)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_intel_cslice.asciidoc

affinity from its sibling cslice partitions.  Therefore, this extension does
not expose this type of partitioning through
`info::partition_property::partition_by_affinity_domain`.  Instead, it adds a
new partitioning type
`info::partition_property::ext_intel_partition_by_cslice`.

The only Intel GPU device that currently supports this type of partitioning is
PVC, and this support is only available when the device driver is configured in
{multi-CCS}[multi-CCS] mode.  See that documentation for instructions on how to
enable this mode and for other important information.  Currently, it is only
possible to partition a device by cslice if the driver is in "2 CCS Mode" or
"4 CCS Mode".  When in 2 CCS Mode, a tile can be partitioned into two cslice
sub-devices.  When in 4 CCS Mode, a tile can be partitioned into four cslice
sub-devices.

This type of partitioning is currently supported only at the "tile" level.
Therefore, a device must first be partitioned into per-tile sub-devices via
`partition_by_affinity_domain`, and then each of the resulting sub-devices can
be further partitioned by `ext_intel_partition_by_cslice`.

> It is important to understand that the device driver virtualizes work

Reviewer: virtualization is not made at the c-slice level, only at the CCS level. c-slice assignment to each CCS is orthogonal. So we could rephrase to something like "driver virtualizes work submission to the different CCSs... and for PVC, this means that these submission end up using different c-slices and EUs".

Author: Reworded in b93f2fe32c36f7b0f48d8ce5ce49d5da4cb01e3c

submission to the cslice sub-devices.  This virtualization happens only between
processes, and not within a single process.  For example, consider a single
process that constructs two SYCL queues on cslice sub-device #0.  Kernels
submitted to these two queues are guaranteed to conflict, both using the same
set of execution units.  Therefore, if a single process wants to explicitly
submit kernels to cslice sub-devices and it wants to avoid conflict, it should
create queues on different sub-devices.  By contrast, consider an example where
two separate processes create a SYCL queue on cslice sub-device #0.  In this
case, the device driver virtualizes access to this cslice, and kernels
submitted from the first process may run on different execution units than
kernels submitted from the second process.  In this second case, the device
driver binds the process's requested cslice to a physical cslice according to

> the overall system load.

Reviewer: to keep in mind: this is only true for PVC. For other GPUs, even when submitting to the different CCSs from different processes, they might end up conflicting on EU usage, since they would be using EUs from all available c-slices and there's no c-slice affinity.

Note that this extension can be supported by any backend and any device.  If a
backend or device does not support the concept of cslice partitions, it can
still conform to this extension by declaring the new enumerator and member
functions specified below.  If the info descriptor query
`info::device::partition_properties` does not report
`ext_intel_partition_by_cslice`, then the implementation need not support

> the creation of cslice partitions.

Reviewer 2: Is this the behavior that we want?  It seems odd to me that a backend or device would advertise support for the extension but then would NOT support the new partition property.

Author: An extension is either supported or not supported by the entire SYCL implementation, which may include several backends.  It would certainly make sense for an implementation to advertise support for this extension and only allow partitioning into cslices on some devices / backends.

Personally, I think it could make sense for an implementation to support this extension even if none of its backends supported this type of partitioning.  For example, this would allow the implementation to consume applications that dynamically check to see if a device supports cslice partitions.  However, that's not something we need to think deeply about since DPC++ would support this type of partitioning.  If other vendors choose to support this extension, they can decided for themselves.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, your description makes sense to me but I still think the way this paragraph uses the terms "device" and "implementation" makes it easy to mis-understand the intent.  How about something more like this instead?

```suggestion
Note that this extension can be supported by any implementation.  If an implementation supports a
backend or device without the concept of cslice partitions it can
still conform to this extension by declaring the new enumerator and member
functions specified below.  If the info descriptor query
`info::device::partition_properties` does not report
`ext_intel_partition_by_cslice`, then the backend or device does not support
the creation of cslice partitions.
```

Author: Thanks, I like that.  Incorporated in 0eb19c64d9ee62af7b497ef2aa81a52442b0370d and 81b6ea1c8fe23b79e3a56ceb8cf09a1ab8101fa3

decimal points can represent either a sub-device created via
`partition_by_affinity_domain` or via `ext_intel_partition_by_cslice`.  When
{dpcpp} processes a term with a decimal point, it first attempts to partition
by `ext_intel_partition_by_cslice`.  If that is not possible, it next attempts
to partition by `partition_by_affinity_domain` /
`partition_affinity_domain::next_partitionable`.

It is important to keep in mind, though, that requesting a specific cslice via
this environment variable has limited effect due to the device driver's
virtualization of cslices.  To illustrate, consider an example where two
processes are launched as follows, selecting different cslice sub-devices:

```
$ ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR=level_zero:0.1.0 ZEX_NUMBER_OF_CCS=0:2 ./foo
$ ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR=level_zero:0.1.1 ZEX_NUMBER_OF_CCS=0:2 ./foo
```

The first process selects cslice #0 while the second selects cslice #1.  This
does have the effect that each process is constrained to a single cslice (which
is not the {dpcpp} default).  However, the actual cslice number is irrelevant.
Because of cslice virtualization, the device driver will choose some available

> cslice for each process, ignoring the value requested in the environment

Reviewer: I would remove the "ignore" part, since it might not be completely true depending on underlying implementation. I would say something like "instead of honoring the value requested ..."

Author: Makes sense.  Added in 6d7448a78983f7ddcb1af0d6e33903e2ceb71dfa.

the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|Initial version of this extension.
|===

=== New partition property

This extension adds a new enumerator named `ext_intel_partition_by_cslice` to
`info::partition_property`:

```
namespace sycl::info {

enum class partition_property : /* unspecified */ {
  // ...
  ext_intel_partition_by_cslice
};

} // namespace sycl::info
```

The behavior of the `info::device::partition_properties` info descriptor query
is also extended to include `ext_intel_partition_by_cslice` in the vector of
returned values if the device can be partitioned into at least two sub-devices
along that partition property.

=== New function template specialization to create sub-devices

This extension adds a new function template specialization to the `device`
class:

```
namespace sycl {

class device {
  // ...

  // Available only when
  // Prop == info::partition_property::ext_intel_partition_by_cslice
  template <info::partition_property Prop>

>   std::vector<device> create_sub_devices() const;

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't it be `ext_intel_create_sub_devices` since this is an extension?

Author: @romanovvlad: Does my answer address your concern?

incompatible ways before it is finalized.  *Shipping software products should
not rely on APIs defined in this specification.*

== Overview

:multi-CCS: https://github.com/intel/compute-runtime/blob/master/level_zero/doc/experimental_extensions/MULTI_CCS_MODES.md

Some Intel GPU devices can be partitioned at a granularity of "cslice" (compute
slice), which is a smaller granularity than "tile".  This form of partitioning
is not currently enabled by default, so it is considered an advanced feature
which most applications are not expected to use.  This extension provides a way
for these advanced applications to partition a device by cslice when it is
enabled in the device driver.

Unlike "tile" partitions, a cslice partition does not have any different cache
affinity from its sibling cslice partitions.  Therefore, this extension does
not expose this type of partitioning through
`info::partition_property::partition_by_affinity_domain`.  Instead, it adds a
new partitioning type
`info::partition_property::ext_intel_partition_by_cslice`.

The only Intel GPU device that currently supports this type of partitioning is

> PVC, and this support is only available when the device driver is configured in

Reviewer 4: Replace PVC with "the Data Center GPU Max series, formerly known as Ponte Vecchio".

Author: Done in 17ca6b61615414fae358eb8a821308c90eeb358e

available when the device driver is configured in {multi-CCS}[multi-CCS] mode.
See that documentation for instructions on how to enable this mode and for
other important information.  Currently, it is only possible to partition a
device by cslice if the driver is in "2 CCS Mode" or "4 CCS Mode".  When in
2 CCS Mode, a tile can be partitioned into two cslice sub-devices.  When in
4 CCS Mode, a tile can be partitioned into four cslice sub-devices.

This type of partitioning is currently supported only at the "tile" level.
Therefore, a device must first be partitioned into per-tile sub-devices via
`partition_by_affinity_domain`, and then each of the resulting sub-devices can

> be further partitioned by `ext_intel_partition_by_cslice`.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be more future-proof to simply say that an application should query `info::device::partition_properties` to determine whether a given device handle supports this partition property rather than providing a specific "recipe".  The query will also work if a routine is passed an arbitrary device handle that may be a per-tile device, or may be some other kind of device, perhaps not even an Intel GPU device.

Reviewer 2: How about something like:

```suggestion
A device should be queried using `info::device::partition_properties` to
determine if it supports partitioning by `ext_intel_partition_by_cslice`. If a
device does not support partitioning by `ext_intel_partition_by_cslice` it may
first need to be partitioned into per-tile sub-devices via
`partition_by_affinity_domain`, and then each of the resulting sub-devices may
be further partitioned by `ext_intel_partition_by_cslice`.
```
